[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Have you ever heard that some
people are able to eat light?
That they live on light alone?
Do you believe this?
Well, I didn't.
But by chance, I saw sometime
in the '90s this TV documentary
on the patron Saint
of Switzerland,
Nicholas of Flüe For the
last 20 years of his life,
his only nourishment was
allegedly divine light.
At the time, I never
dreamed of making a movie
about this phenomenon
some day, a project that
would span years and
take me around the world.
But this is the following story.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Saint Nicholas of Flüe
didn't eat or drink anything
for the rest of his life.
That was roughly 20 years.
And this has been confirmed.
But of course, it
can't be explained.
That's that.
>> To be honest, I never thought
about Saint Nicholas of Flüe
again and forgot all about
the myth of being able to live
without food until I met Dieter.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I no longer
eat physical food.
I just drink fluids.
But sometimes, I add
flavorings, a few drops
of tamari in my water
for taste or ginger.
But my only nourishment
really does come from fluids.
>> So you don't have a
calorie intake to speak of?
>> No, definitely not.
I get plenty of calories
from another level.
>> When did you start
living on light?
>> Back in 1998.
I bought that book
a long time ago.
The title looked interesting--
"Living On Light."
It seem perfectly logical to
me, because we are light beings.
People ask me, well, do
you stand in the sun,
or what do you do?
I say, no, no, it's got
nothing to do with that light.
Light is considered to be one
of the highest frequencies.
In August of 1998, I went
through that 21-day breatharian
process.
The first seven
days, they're hard.
There's no doubt about that.
You aren't allowed
to eat or drink,
not a single drop of
water can pass your lips.
After the first week, though,
you start drinking again,
clear water.
And by the end of
that 21-day process,
I really no longer
felt the need for food.
But I followed that path.
On the 50th day, I
thought to myself,
I don't know anybody who
has fasted for 50 days.
And I really don't.
That's when I knew it worked.
Gradually, your confidence
and faith increase.
Until today, I feel
secure in my practice.
I know that if I
lose everything--
absolutely everything--
I still won't need to eat.
And if at some point, I
decide it's time to change,
well, I'll change.
I can stop anytime.
Hell, I don't need
to prove a thing.
And I'd never volunteer
for medical testing.
No way.
That would go against all
my holistic principles.
When I look at doctors,
I don't see a one of them
willing to deal with this
subject, not seriously.
>> Humans need energy for
their vital processes.
If he isn't eating,
where is he getting
the energy for his heart, his
liver, or his respiration?
>> If someone tells me, I
haven't eaten for years,
and I'm still alive, one would
primarily doubt the truth
of this statement.
>> For a human to be able
to live on light is beyond
my comprehension.
Because we are not plants.
We are human beings.
And we depend on the intake of
energy in a form we are capable
of processing.
>> If this phenomenon
really existed,
people wouldn't have
to starve to death.
And there are places
in the world where
people are hungry and starving.
Why then?
>> There are no studies that
show we can last without
replenishing our energy reserves
for longer than two months.
To me, these claims
are just that--
merely unsubstantiated claims.
>> What's lacking from my
scientific standpoint is
empirical evidence.
>> And this makes
people suspicious.
>> Six years without food,
the 42-year-old Australian,
Jasmuheen, claims she hasn't
eaten food since 1993.
She lives on light and air.
Please, welcome Jasmuheen.
Thank you for coming.
You are an ambassador
of this teaching
that you yourself practice.
What is the secret
to this way of life?
>> It's the result of being
connected to a higher power.
We are nourished by
an alternative source
that Indian yogis call prana.
>> Dr. Walter Edom, internist
and head physician at the new
Wiener Privatklinik. clinic.
The claim is six years.
>> That's impossible.
>> Is this straight out fraud?
>> Yes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Contradictions and more
contradictions are what I find
on the internet
about breatharianism.
And I'm not getting anywhere.
But I do meet Axel on
of the internet forums.
He wants to try the 21-day
breatharian process.
And he's willing to document
the 21 days in a video diary.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I have no idea
what's in store for me.
However, I intend to record
a diary entry every day.
Since last fall, I've known that
I would attempt this transition
process.
It was only a matter of time.
The Australian, Jasmuheen, she
suggests a three-week process.
There's no food or drink
for the first week.
And the following two weeks,
you're allowed to have fluids.
And after that, it's
living without food.
We'll see about that later.
Now, I'm about to take my last
sip of water for a whole week.
Here it is.
Cheers.
Today is March 27, 7:00 PM,
first day of the transition
process.
I feel great.
This is day three.
It's around 4:00 PM.
Yesterday, I was just too
tired to record anything,
and I was exhausted.
And I slept 14 hours
straight until this morning.
Today, my circulation's weak.
It's a little slow.
Today is March 30.
It's day fourt of the
breatharian process.
It's noon.
Feel like I'm getting
weaker and weaker.
It started yesterday
more than 24 hours ago.
That's why I'm going to
slightly modify the process.
And that means I'm going
to go ahead and start
drinking my first sip of water.
I think it makes sense.
Because first, this
isn't fun anymore.
It's starting to get tedious and
difficult. It's OK for a while,
but not for prolonged periods.
I'm a little concerned
too, because I
can't get my energy back.
Here it is.
This is my first sip.
Ah, it's like heaven.
No, this is not
light nourishment.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> As a physician, I simply
cannot recommend going without
fluids for seven days.
A lot of people could
benefit from discovering
what fasting can do
for them, but you need
to drink plenty of liquids.
This will flush the kidneys and
generally prevent health risks.
For spiritual or
religious reasons,
one might fast for long periods.
And at some point, after
three or four weeks,
one will indeed
stop losing weight.
Life feels good.
And one can then
relate better to nature
and its manifold realms.
That's the natural
course of things.
But I wouldn't advocate abruptly
cutting out food altogether
and going seven
days without fluids.
If someone has an extremely
bad diet, is full of toxins,
and has various illnesses,
fasting alone can be difficult.
And medical supervision
is necessary.
Going without water
can be very dangerous.
I strongly advise against it.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Radical diet, the esoteric
Heidi Meyer wanted to live
on nothing but air and light.
She died eight
days later, a death
that poses many
questions, because it
happened in connection
with radical fasting.
Doctor, what happens
when one goes
without food and especially
without water for seven days?
>> Not drinking is the
more serious problem.
Our body consists
mainly of water.
If we are deprived of water for
more than three or four days,
we will, in those cases, die.
That's why not drinking
is particularly dangerous.
>> In addition to the death
of this Austrian woman,
three further cases in
connection with the 21-day
process make
international headlines.
In Germany, the kindergarten
teacher, Timo Degen,
goes into a coma after not
drinking for seven days.
He dies several weeks
later in a nursing home.
In Australia, the
53-year-old, Lani Morris,
suffers a stroke while
undergoing the process.
But the most
publicized case is that
of 40-year-old,
Verity Linn, who dies
while doing the
21-day process alone
in the Scottish highlands.
>> I remember when Verity
Linn died in Scotland.
She died from exposure to
the elements and dehydration.
Now, in my book, we say, when
you start the 21-day process,
don't go outside.
Don't move.
Stay inside.
Conserve your energy.
She chose not to do that.
They found my book with her,
no evidence of food or liquid.
And so they just said, well,
Jasmuheen killed this woman.
The media in England,
and Scotland,
and in Australia at the
time was, breatharian guru,
Jasmuheen, blond,
bimbo murders people.
>> I've spoken to now over 900
million people through media
over the last decade.
So the reality of this
is planted in the field.
I agree, most people I've spoken
to about this through the media
have said, crazy
woman, not possible.
But at least I've
talked about it,
at least it's put the
idea that maybe it's
possible in the field.
So as we accept something
as being possible,
the doors to this
open more and more.
So, therefore, when I went
through this initiation in '93,
I was able, as a consequence, to
attract enough cosmic particles
to really be able to nourish
my body in a completely
different way.
And similarly, after
learning to live on light,
I started to learn that if
I wanted to satisfy flavor
and the odd feeling I wanted for
flavor and taste, which I still
wanted, and I took a piece
of chocolate, which I liked,
but people would go,
oh, how could you do
that have prawn and chocolate?
Because I'm finding in
this path that once you've
proven to you that prana
can nourish you, give you
all your vitamins, minerals,
everything you need,
once you've given yourself
that freedom by living it,
there's nothing else to
prove to anyone else.
It just worked for me.
Actually, I made the
mistake early on--
I guess, you could say, if
these are seen as mistakes--
I just assumed that if I
could do the 21-day process,
and it gave me this
gift of living on prana,
that would help everybody.
But I realized that's not true.
>> On the internet, I find
many stories of people who have
successfully completed
the 21-day process.
In Germany alone, there are
allegedly several thousand.
But how are they now?
And do they still eat food?
In Berlin, I find some answers.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [SPEAKING POLISH]
>> I'm Danu, and I
come from Poland.
For five years, I
have been interested
in the subject of
breatharianism.
A few years cycle I
underwent the 21-day' process
three times.
Twice, I succeeded
in staying with it
and lived continually on prana
for three months each time.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> There is a certain
fascination about the idea
of not being dependent on
physical material nourishment
of any kind.
>> There's this one side
of me, the scientific,
reasonable side of
me that said, no way.
Living on light--
that's bullshit.
Can't be done.
And then I've got this
other good-natured,
adventurous said that said,
try it and see why happens.
It could be fun.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I noticed how ingrained
this idea has become.
Three or four days without
food and water, and you die.
How strongly
indoctrinated we are.
And yet, at the
same time, something
was telling me, have faith.
You are in good hands.
>> I did it in a group.
There were nine of us.
On the fourth day, I
stopped losing weight.
My weight stabilized at
just under 50 kilograms.
And I felt myself
being nourished.
It was an aha-moment.
>> I'm sure I seemed very
weak for the first seven days.
But after that
first sip of water,
it was like the
end of a drought.
>> Ah, the first sip of water.
I'll never forget it.
We all wanted to
continue for half a year.
After three weeks,
the group split up.
I went to Bavaria
to visit my mother.
And the next day, I ate food
again, cautiously at first,
but I tried everything.
And, oh, how guilty
I felt. My god,
we had all agreed
not to eat again.
I called everyone, and
all of them had eaten.
And we all had the
same bad conscience.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I started eating immediately.
It was my mistake.
I didn't even wait
for Sunday to end,
so technically, I wasn't done.
Sunday evening, I sat
down and had a thought,
have a piece of toast.
So I ate it.
Then I thought, OK, now,
eat a toast with cheese.
And then I said, now, go on,
eat a toast with cheese and ham.
So I popped it in the
microwave, and, well,
that was my relapse
back to normal life.
>> My current situation
is easy to describe.
It's as simple as that.
I'm eating at the moment.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I also did the
21-day process.
And when I got out of it
is that now, when I eat,
it is concept-free.
I only eat on impulse
and when it feels good.
>> Excellent.
That's a great way of
putting it-- concept-free.
>> Not mentally imposed.
>> Exactly.
>> This notion of
eating to survive,
it just no longer exists.
>> In Berlin, I also hear
about a man who did the 21-day
process and never
went back to eating.
And I trace him back to Austria.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In Saalfelden there are
a bunch of people that went
through the prana
process, you see.
But most of them went back
to eating physical food
as far as I know today.
What was your question?
I decided to go through the
21-day process to free myself.
And it totally calmed
my emotional body.
Then I said to myself, as soon
as we feel hungry, we will eat.
But it's been seven
years since I've
readjusted my energy intake.
And I haven't felt hungry since.
I don't need to go
home for lunch at noon.
I can walk to Vienna instead,
and I can do whatever I want.
That's the main focus--
freedom.
I don't need to spend 300
euros a month on food.
That's a lot of man hours.
And that's another
aspect of freedom.
I don't have to work for food.
I can hike up mountains while
other people are taking naps.
After lunch, I'll be out and
about doing these fun things.
People think they
need it materially,
that they have to touch it
in order for it to work.
And at the same time,
there's so many phenomena
that aren't visible.
You just have to believe them
without understanding them.
But people are scared of
things they can't explain.
OK, a plant uses photosynthesis.
It metabolizes light, and people
eat this metabolized light,
breaking it down further.
In other words, by
eating a potato,
you're getting the metabolized
light from the potato.
You filter out the rough
part, that's the stool
and keep the light.
It's like photosyntheis
in your stomach.
>> And how is it with you?
>> I get the light directly.
But I don't need stool.
I just don't have stool anymore.
That's all.
When I'm in the
city, I've noticed
that the solid forms of
prana seem to get more dense.
If I spend four
days in Vienna, it
feels good to have a liter
of soy milk in the evening.
Whenever I spend a
lot of time in nature,
the dense prana
dissolves more and more.
And all I really need is the air
and water to live a full life.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> To me, it's an interesting
phenomenon, but ultimately,
I'd like to see these phenomena
in a clinical environment,
subjected to close
scientific scrutiny.
So we can see what
they're really ingesting
and where we can
measure the parameters.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I was kept under
24-hour video observation.
There was a 10-day
experiment, and they collected
a lot of data every single day.
And I, too, was very
interested in the scientific,
the absolutely conventional,
solid, rigorous, and unbiased
approach to this issue.
Because I needed to
address the questions
generated by this phenomenon.
My name is Michael Werner.
I underwent the 21-day
breatharian process
in January of 2001.
And I have not gone
back to eating since.
I'm a scientist.
And I asked myself,
how is this possible?
What do I say to colleagues
or in scientific circles?
Am I making a fool of myself?
I want people to
take me seriously.
This all originated
as a new-age thing,
which I don't always understand
nor always agree with.
A stubborn materialist might
well say, count me out.
But I can't change
the way it is.
My first encounter was
completely unexpected.
Six years ago, my son
was being married,
and an old family friend
was staying with us.
She wasn't eating.
And we asked her if
there is anything wrong.
Nothing, she claimed to
have simply converted
to pranic feeding.
Well, that blew my mind.
It stirred me up
emotionally, got me thinking.
And then she told me
about a book by Jasmuheen.
I read it.
But I was fascinated
to say the least.
But half a year later, I
decided to put it to the test.
I undertook the ordeal of
the 21-day process myself.
And I have lived
this way ever since.
I was highly skeptical about
the way the book put it.
And I never experience any
heavenly brothers working
in me, at least not directly.
But on the third
night, I must also
admit that I did
indeed experience
an undeniable change.
When I awoke on day four,
I knew unequivocally
that I was no longer fasting.
It was evident.
It simply was.
It was as if I had eaten a full
meal, and I required no more.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I wasn't exactly euphoric
about this whole experiment.
But I understood that
he was going to do it.
Because he's a searcher
and is interested in things
that push the bounds
of the normal,
both in terms of
himself and in general.
>> And what are your meals like?
>> Our meals consist of me
eating the things normally
eaten by people and my
husband sitting there,
having something to drink.
That's the social aspect.
You come together for a meal.
You talk.
You drink.
He does everything except eat.
>> And what kind of an
eater was he before?
>> A big eater.
He totally enjoyed eating.
>> I simply feel good
living without food.
It does me good.
It's what I experience.
And not eating is
simply the price
I must pay to attain this state.
I feel healthy.
I'm in good shape.
And I think I can do more
than I used to in terms
of strength and endurance.
I experienced that the
more I push my body,
the stronger I get.
My hair's growing.
My beard is growing,
my fingernails too.
Where does it come from?
Normally, you think,
well, when I eat food,
I take in substances and I
digest them, breaking them
down a little Lego blocks,
which I reassemble,
and then my body is
happy and content.
Certainly, there is
some truth to that.
The question, though, is, are
there other ways of doing this?
>> My name is Thomas Stockli.
And I would say I'm
one of Michael Werner's
critical friends I follow
his strange way of life,
as I refer to it,
with skepticism,
but great interest as well.
I find it extremely fascinating.
>> When a scientist hears about
something like breatharian,
he should be eager to study
it and ask, what's going on?
How can this be?
>> That's why I wanted to work
with Michael Werner to come up
with sound, scientific proof.
>> We both knew that if
we spoke of pranic feeding
or breatharianism, it would
make things very hard to receive
approval.
>> But I was surprised at
how powerful their opposition
and defensiveness to these
new ideas turned out to be.
>> We submitted our study
to the ethics committee,
and it took two
years to be approved.
The experiment took place
a year and a half ago.
10 days under rigorously
monitored conditions.
They made absolutely
sure I wouldn't
be able to eat or leave.
My room was in an
intensive care unit,
with the window nailed shut.
They had the variables
completely under control
and had established a rigorous,
solid experimental design.
And therefore,
evaluating the data
wasn't really all
that complicated.
One of my requirements
was that they published
the findings no matter what.
But in fact, today, 1.5
years later, the results
still haven't been published.
I found the results
myself rather surprising,
rather disappointing.
I had lost some weight
during the 10 days.
>> He lost a little
weight during that time,
but it was still an
incredible accomplishment.
Because the weight
he lost was minimal.
They did, however, register
an increase in ketone bodies.
And that is an
indication of fasting.
>> I could only surmise why
this might have occurred,
and closed conditions that were
indeed difficult and clearly
unnatural.
Because for 10 days, I
was breathing only air
from the air conditioner, and
that really felt all wrong.
We're planning a
second experiment,
and I hope we can avoid that.
>> Two years after our
first encounter, I visit Dr.
Werner at the Lake Neuchatel,
where he's on vacation.
Not much has changed.
He still isn't eating.
The Bern study still
hasn't been published.
But at the University
of Prague, he
has undergone
another experiment.
>> The study in Prague came
about because the Bern study
still had not been published.
So I said, let's move
on, start over again.
And we all agreed
from the outset
once again that
anything we documented
would indeed be published,
no matter the results.
And at the end of
the experiment,
when all the results were in,
the man in charge of the study
once again said, we're
not publishing it.
He gave no explanation.
That's how the world
of science reacts.
It says, either he's a
lunatic, and we have a problem.
Or he's right, and then
we also have a problem.
So let's just drop it.
>> The man in charge of the
study in Prague turned me down
repeatedly, refusing
to comment on camera.
Same with the head
physician in Bern.
>> Ultimately, they also see it
as a threat to the world view
of allopathic medicine.
The representatives
of allopathic medicine
are not reacting with
appropriate scientific
curiosity as one might expect
from a physicist or a chemist.
If a physicist says,
swans are white.
That's a hypothesis.
If they find 100,000 white
swans, it's still a hypothesis.
When they find the
first black swan,
they test it to
see if it's dyed.
And if it's real,
end of hypothesis,
disproven with a
single black Swan.
>> You're right, if this
were, in principle, possible,
whether just one man
could do it or 100,000.
It would turn things
on their head.
Scientific rigor would
indeed require that we
re-examine the way we think.
>> Aside from the controversies
in the Werner case,
there was another study
conducted in India in 2003 that
definitely seems to confirm the
phenomenon of pranic feeding.
It was conducted on a yogi
who claims he has neither
eaten or drank for decades.
But what is behind these
incredible accounts
on the internet?
Of course, I'm eager to
meet this mysterious yogi.
And I get the rare
opportunity to film him
in his native village.
Prahlad Jani normally lives
in a cave in the mountains.
But once a year, he
visits his family
to celebrate the holy
Navaratri festival.
Here, the yogi is worshipped
as a holy man, who
had a vision at the age
of seven and, allegedly,
hasn't had a bite of food
or drop of water since.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> At midnight of the eighth
day of Navaratri three goddesses
appeared to me and
bade me to follow--
Maha Kali, Maha Lakshmi,
and Maha Saraswati.
I consented, prepared myself,
and asked, what about my food?
They each placed a finger
on my lips and said,
you need not be concerned
about food ever again.
I was seven.
And from that day on, I
stopped eating and drinking.
>> 60 years without
water, or food, or energy,
I simply don't believe it.
That's impossible.
>> I've gotten out of the habit
of saying, it's impossible.
Instead, I just say,
I can't imagine it.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In India, there's an entire
tradition of the renunciation
of food.
>> One common denominator I've
noticed in all these stories is
that these claims are always
made by individual persons.
And there is no objective
proof whatsoever.
>> If we have similar
accounts in so many different
traditions, why do we think
they are all fabrications?
That's completely unrealistic.
>> OK, but then it would
be interesting to let four,
or five, maybe six trustworthy
people observe him.
[FESTIVE INDIAN MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Sudhir Shah.
I'm director of new sciences
at Sterling Hospital,
a city-based corporate hospital
of a very high station.
One doctor telephoned me that
he's aware of some person
in his village
who is not eating,
not drinking anything
for nearly 64 years.
I was very skeptic
to what all he said.
I laughed at him.
I said, I think this
is unbelievable.
Dr. what are you talking here.
Have you got any
evidence for that?
You know, Doctor I'm just
telling that these people
have brought him to me.
And I know this
mataji for some time.
And if you like to study,
I can ask him to see you.
One day, he came to
my office and said,
OK, I'll allow you
to investigate,
but nothing invasive
will be done on my body.
I said, you'll have
to be in the hospital
under continuous
video monitoring.
And if you are true, I will put
your good remarks to the world.
If you are wrong, I will
have to literally undress you
in the sense this is cheating.
If you are prepared, then come.
>> So Dr. Sudhir Shah approached
me regarding this mataji.
And for the medical science,
this is not possible.
>> I was so hopeless to begin
with that I thought that it
would not continue for
more than 24 hours.
They project up to
lajani or mataji
to prove that he's
not taking anything.
He's not taking food, not
taking water, not passing urine,
not passing stool.
This had to be proved
only physically.
You have to keep a watch on
him, and it can be proved.
>> So it was constantly
observation under
my supervision.
All the security personnel board
was up from the hospital site.
And it was a camera observation.
I started my mind
that he is cheating,
and this is not
going to continue.
So from day one only, I
took all possible measures
to see that he's not
left alone for a moment.
We went on changing
the security.
the camera men,
so that they can not
make any problem.
We went on putting two
cassettes simultaneously,
so that he while
changing the cassettes,
he may not pass urine.
At the end of the project,
other countries involved,
Mr. Prahlad Jani did not take
anything orally, neither fluid,
nor water, nor food during
these 10 days of our project.
Number, two Mr. Prahlad Jani
did not pass urine or stool
during these 10 days, although,
we could see formation of urine
in his bladder, which was
reabsorb from the bladder.
>> I was doing the sonograph
twice a day for seven days--
morning, evening,
morning, evening.
And it was ups and downs.
One times is up 400 mL,
then 200 mL, 300 mL urine.
But at the end of the
study, gradually, there
was no urine in his
urinary bladder.
He was claiming that
he's absorbing the urine
in his body, which was
difficult to explain
as far as the
science is concerned.
>> We did have a protocol, which
included complete blood count,
ESR, renal function
test, endocrinal test,
liver function test,
and all x-rays,
including whole body CT scan.
>> The pressing part was
all his organs were normal
morphologically.
His test was clear.
Kidneys, live, spleen,
everything was normal.
Everything was
normal, and there was
no changes because of the age.
>> All possible things that
could be done non-invasively
in this hi-fi, corporate
hospital with the help
of so much involved consultants,
who most of us are trained
abroad also, and we are
just scratching our head
as to the greatest surprise that
we saw in our lifetime so far.
>> I find it fascinating and
absolutely incomprehensible.
It's completely
beyond my imagination.
I'm seeing this
for the first time.
And if you had just told
me, I would have said,
I don't believe it.
For 10 days, he didn't urinate,
pass stool, or have anything
to drink or eat.
And they conducted rigorous
laboratory tests on him.
One would expect
extremely high levels
of uremic waste products.
This is an absolute bombshell.
[INDIAN MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This, I tell you from
personal experience.
He grew up like
every other child.
But then, suddenly, he
stopped eating and drinking.
If someone gave him
food, he would vomit.
They tested him.
He couldn't keep anything down.
He would vomit immediately.
When he was 11, he left us.
He went to the woods
of Mahabaleshwar,
He meditated for six years.
Then he decided to
go to Ambaji, where
he has been meditating
for 35 to 40 years.
He's almost 78 years old.
And for 70 years, we have seen
that he doesn't eat, drink,
urinate, or defecate.
Whatever power he has
is from the goddess.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> When the goddesses appear
to me, I lose consciousness.
I hallucinate.
All I see is light, nothing
but light everywhere.
Many scientists have asked
me, what do you know?
How can you live
without food and drink?
I have been doing
it for decades.
I defy science.
>> This is a bomb.
The whole science
has to be rechecked.
>> Something is there.
And what is that something?
We hope to find it.
>> Maybe there is
something to it.
Who knows?
>> There's 100% truth in this.
I hear there is a truth.
It is for the scientific world
to now answer this question.
>> Perhaps what we are
witnessing here are phenomena
to which the natural sciences
have no obvious access.
Science considers this
inconceivable and impossible.
But other frames of thought
might allow such things.
>> And there's not one
case, as I mentioned.
There are many cases.
So must now open up the
mind of Western scientists.
Why I call Western scientists?
Because all Indian people
intuitively and culturally
are aware of yogis,
and sadhus, and madmas.
>> I'm a traditional
ayurvedic physician.
My father, my grandfather, my
maternal grandfather, everybody
was in an ayurvedic physician.
And each and every real
ayurvedic physician
will turn into a yogi.
This type of
incident of a person
not taking food
for years together
is an exceptional case.
In a routine life, everyone
needs to have food.
But my spiritual and Indian
spiritual sense, or rather, I
should say, Eastern,
this part of the world
help to develop a special
process through which they
can live without food.
>> In his world-famous,
"Autobiography of a Yogi,"
Paramahansa Yogananda was the
first to describe an Indian
yogini to divest in readers,
who, at the age of 12,
had already learned the
technique of living entirely
without food and drink--
Giri Bala.
Yogananda also makes
reference to the Yoga Sutras
of Patanjali, the
Bible of the yogi.
Written thousands
of years ago, it
describes a technique
that allows a person
to live on only
air and sunlight.
>> The light from the sun enters
the brain, charges the brain.
And through it, the
whole body is charged.
There is no hunger.
There is no desire for food.
And that's what happens
with the power of the sun.
It's a very easy practice.
Sun is the original source
of energy, what we eat.
The body is a mechanism
to receive sun energy,
convert it into any other
form of energy required.
And this is what happens
when you look at the sun
during safe hours.
From 1962, I was reading on
the benefits of sun-gazing
from the mother of
Ashram And in 1992, I
decided to apply
this in my life.
And so I retired from
the business in 1992.
And now, my sole mission
is spreading this message.
>> I invite Mr.
Manick to Vienna.
He rarely eats.
But more interestingly, he
completed a 410-day water fast
under medical observation.
Now, I want him to meet
Professor Luger from the Vienna
University Clinic.
>> Beliefs don't change.
This practice
should be encouraged
by all open-minded people.
>> So what is so hard for me
is to understand, every day,
100,000 people die because they
do not receive enough food.
This is my question to you.
What would be your
explanation that such
a simple and ubiquitous
available thing is not
used more by the human being?
>> Sun-gazing is not a process
to make you less eating or non
eating at all.
It's a process by which
you get mental health.
You get physical health.
You get spiritual health.
And if you so desire
as your byproduct,
you can eat less or
even remain without food
for many, many months
and years even.
This is what I wanted to say.
Merely saying that
sunlight is falling,
and you get energy, no,
that is not correct.
It has to be taken
inside your body
in a systematic, scientific way.
There are protocols.
And if you follow
that, then you'll
definitely get the benefits.
I belong to a religion
called Jain religion, where
this fasting is one
of the traditions.
And Jainism always advocates
that one should try
to eat less and less and less.
>> Ahmedabad in northwest India
is the city with the highest
density of trains in the world.
I want to learn more
about this religion
that seeks to reduce
food intake to a minimum
and whose principle
of asceticism
is so extreme that the
trained monks, the sadhus,
even renounce.
>> The number of
sadhus are very few,
and they are all most residing
in jungles, not in the city.
You can found that hardly
in cities, very hardly.
Jain sadhus are not
using any vehicles.
They are going always by foot.
They have no house.
They have no help.
They not keep a single
money with a single rupee,
because of happiness.
In Jain, they say try not to
go for any violence first.
So in fasting also, the main
purposes is for violence.
If you're not taking any food,
then the violence principle
will keep alive.
Normally, with [INAUDIBLE],,
we can say that is up to one
month, is a very easy fasting.
Everybody can fast.
Even a small boy of four
years, three years, two years,
they are fasting.
We are in a strict manner,
a jain religion manner,
not taking any food.
So many person are
not taking even water.
Without water, they can
resist to six months.
If your will-power is strong,
not necessary pour any energy.
>> These are ancient traditions
with positive experiences.
It's a common
thing in religions.
Mohammed once said, prayer
gets us halfway to heaven.
Fasting gets us to the
very door of heaven.
And this form of living
without physical nourishment
has a long tradition.
There are such accounts
in our own tradition too.
For example, Theres Neumann of
Konnersreuth, during Nazi rule,
her only food was apparently
the daily Eucharist.
The last thing the Nazis wanted
was another Catholic Saint,
so they monitored her.
And her case is fairly
well-documented.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> She lived without food from
1926 till her death in 1962.
Scientists studied this
phenomenon as best they could.
It started with her medical
examination and monitoring
in July of 1927.
After two weeks,
this was aborted.
Because the doctors pronounced
that she should already
have been dead for days.
>> She wasn't hungry.
She couldn't have
eaten anything either.
Even if she had wanted
to, she quite simply
could not physically eat.
To me, it was a
miracle, is a miracle.
To a non-believer,
Neumann will always
remain an unresolved issue.
All he can say is that
there is no explanation.
No natural law
exists to explain it.
And so for them,
it must be a hoax.
>> We can find many baffling
instances of fasting throughout
Western history if
we look closely.
In addition to Saint
Nicholas of Flüe,
Christian medieval
mysticism, in particular,
boasts quite a few
forgotten cases.
For example, [INAUDIBLE]
of who fell seriously ill
and was healed by visions.
According to the
annals, she didn't
eat for the rest of her life as
many Christian saints have also
been described as doing.
But the most frequent
and oldest documentation
on the art of
living without food
is found in the Chinese
Taoist tradition.
>> [SPEAKING CHINESE]
>> The first documented cases
are from the Warring States
period, more than
2000 years ago.
At the time, some
people had already
achieved the state of bigu.
What does bigu mean?
Gu literally means springs,
but symbolically, it
extends for all food.
Bi means to avoid.
One avoids food
and, by doing so,
achieves health and vitality.
That is the meaning of bigu.
For ages, there have been
people in the Wudang mountains
who have achieved the bigu
state through training.
They reach this state by
replenishing chi, or life
force, through exercises.
These people can go
without food for years.
In order to experience bigu, one
has to reach a certain level.
One must train
regularly and be fit.
Bigu goes hand-in-hand
with this.
If you try to attain
the bigu state by force,
maybe you stop eating, because
bigu is supposed to be good.
You can cause your
body great harm.
>> [SPEAKING CHINESE]
>> Just because we claim bigu
is possible doesn't mean one
should arbitrarily
try to achieve it.
One must learn the
right technique,
seek the help of a teacher.
One can learn bigu through
[CHINESE WORD] which plays
an important role in Taoism.
Bigu should not be confused
with a conscious denial of food.
To practice bigu, it is best
to choose a clean environment
with plenty of
negatively charged ions
and oxygen. In
cities, our chi fields
are often disrupted and chaotic.
Pollution influences
our chi fields
and impairs the energy
intake of the human body.
There is a Taoist saying that
goes something like this--
he who is filled with
chi needs no food.
He has attained the
state we call bigu.
>> [SPEAKING CHINESE]
>> Chi is part of the
invisible side of our bodies.
The Chinese say, I
live on chi alone.
That mean, if I don't
eat, and I open my body,
I can live on nature and energy.
Energy flows through
its own channels.
We call these
channels meridians.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The remarkable thing here
is that meridians have nothing
to do with the nervous,
vascular, or lymphatic systems.
These nonphysical
systems don't apply.
You almost have to say that
in a functional sense, rather
than a purely
morphological sense,
aside from the
well-described vascular,
nervous, and lymphatic
systems, there
is a forth system consisting
of acupuncture channels.
35 years ago, people
were very skeptical,
because we, as
allopathic doctors,
were studying traditional
Chinese medicine
and its seemingly
unfathomable methods.
And it was a rocky path,
because using our methods
to measure chi as we see it in
an allopathic, physiological
sense is not possible.
>> But Chinese medicine
says we live on chi.
This ancient philosophy
states that one need not
draw chi from food,
for it can also
come from light and energy.
>> [SPEAKING CHINESE]
>> My name is Tian Ying.
I come from China.
I have lived in the
state of bigu since 1993.
I have also experienced
absolute bigu,
which means not eating
and drinking at all.
Sometimes, if I
have a lot of work
and no time for my
Qigong exercises,
I might have to eat some
fruit, but only a little bit.
I achieved my bigu state
through energy transmission
from Tian Gong founder, Le
Tian, the Tian Gong grandmaster.
It was a large stadium, and he
transmitted the bigu energy.
And I received this energy.
Ever since then, I have
lived in the bigu state.
>> [SPEAKING CHINESE]
>> Of course, not everyone
can attain this state.
Basically, there
are different ways.
One can learn a
bigu Qigong exercise
and practice it until
one reaches the state.
Or one can consult
a Qigong master, who
can transfer energy to others.
I don't know why.
But in our experience, this can
bring very successful results.
>> I don't get the
munchies anymore.
It's a miracle.
I used to crave cookies.
I ate them all the time.
>> After I transfer for energy,
some patients immediately feel
satiated.
>> My appetite is gone.
When I am with my
family on the weekend,
I have a normal serving,
and I feel very hungry.
But I only end up
eating this much.
>> People who have never
experienced bigu derive
the greatest
pleasure from eating.
But once they have
the experience bigu,
the greatest pleasure
comes from bigu.
>> The ability to live
without food doesn't depend
on a special practice
or tradition.
I come to realize this and
find baffling confirmation
on my trip to southern Russia.
[SPEAKING RUSSIAN]
>> My name is Zinaida
Gregorieva Baranova.
On March 26 of 2000, I
stopped eating physical food.
And on April 18 of 2000, I
also stopped drinking fluids.
>> [CHANTING IN RUSSIAN]
To me, it was incredible.
Because I did not know you could
live without food and water.
I just wanted to
improve my health.
In October of 1993,
I became a vegetarian
and started to rely upon
alternative healing methods.
Gradually, it came
to my mind that I
could stop eating all together.
I wasn't at all scared.
I completely trusted myself
to the higher powers.
It wasn't my idea
to stop eating.
That was a recommendation
that came from above.
So it was easy to
start the experiment.
I no longer regard
eating as a source
of pleasure and enjoyment.
It doesn't bother me if
older people eat and I don't.
There are so many other
pleasures in life.
[FESTIVE MUSIC PLAYING]
People often ask
to speak with me.
Yet, as soon as I open the
door, they start shouting,
you charlatan, liar!
I tell them to sit down,
and I speak to them calmly.
I don't try to convince them.
You can't convince
anyone of something
that their consciousness
isn't ready to accept
or even comprehend.
First, you would have to
explain that man is not just
a physical body.
The body is like a
Russian babushka doll,
with smaller and
smaller dolls inside.
The smallest doll is
our physical body.
The rest of them are
all energetic bodies.
I can't say there have
been a lot of scientists
interested in studying it.
In fact, there has
only been Dr. Rosinov,
head of the Bioenergy Center.
He is using kirlian
photography on me.
[SPEAKING RUSSIAN]
>> We are taking
photographs of Ms. Baranova.
We now have photographs of
Zinaida Baranova's fingertips.
Here on the screen, we
have her bio-energy field.
The image indicates
a perfect state.
This image shows the ideal
field of an athlete, biathalon
champion.
This image shows problems zones.
Here are more problem zones.
There, we see the
negative effects
of the computer on
the human organism.
Ms. Baranova's health
condition is ideal.
Maybe others in the world have
attained this perfect state
too.
There are allegedly some
30,000 people living on prana.
Maybe all of them have
an aura like this.
>> I want you to have my
bio-energy printout from Dr.
Rosinov.
>> [SPEAKING RUSSIAN]
>> This looks terrific.
It's just what you hope for.
As far as I can
tell, this appears
to reflect a perfect
energy state.
The basis of this gas
discharge visualization
is kirlian effect,
which may elicit
howls of protest because
of its past connections
with dubious applications.
But we've made progress
since those days
and are now able to
exploit the kirlian effect
for real scientific benefits.
It's a legitimate way to
create a visual record
of the human energy field.
I think this
particular human energy
field is comparable to
what Chinese medicine calls
chi, or life force.
And we are beginning to realize
that the size of this field
is a parameter for a
person's energy state.
An energetically-beautiful,
well-rounded, balanced diagram
like this is quite rare.
If this woman doesn't really eat
food, if that's actually true--
>> She also doesn't drink.
>> She doesn't drink anything?
>> She says she stopped
drinking in the year 2000.
>> I don't believe that.
>> How can I prove
it to the doctors?
It is a fact.
How can I prove it is possible?
It's true.
The proof is sitting
in front of you.
>> Everything a doctor or a
scientist says about a human
system regarding nutrition is
absolutely true when the brain
wave patterns are anchored in
what I call the beta frequency.
But as soon as you
start to engage
in a spiritual
lifestyle, of meditation,
of prayer, of service, of
being in the company of truth
of silence, of nature, of
listening to devotional music,
these sorts of
things change the way
the brain operates, changes the
brainwave patterns from alpha
to theta and start to reveal
amazing hidden capabilities
within the human system.
>> I think any allopathic doctor
would have to be skeptical.
It contradicts everything
we've been taught.
And thus, all we
can say is there are
many things I don't understand.
This is one such instance.
I'm afraid that actual
understanding of the mechanism
of this phenomenon is not
really enhanced by the data
we collected from
Hira Ratan Manek.
>> For example, his weight
isn't low or even normal.
In fact, he's
overweight for his size.
He's 5 foot 9 and
weighs 185 pounds.
It's incredible
that his system can
stabilize like this
without him losing
enormous amounts of weight.
How can it be?
I'm sure there are
other phenomena at play
here, which we have
no way of testing.
>> The experts who would
definitely have more to say
in this matter would
be the physicists.
>> Nowhere but in physics do
I know of any laws that could
answer questions like, how
do cells carry out thousands
of chemical reactions at the
right time, at the right place,
and in the right way?
Today, we know that
biophotons are responsible.
These biophotons are
an emission of light.
They might, for example,
be radiated by the sun.
A chemical reaction only
occurs if it is previously
activated by light.
These weak rays
in the cell assume
this regulating capability.
They are responsible for keeping
everything running smoothly.
Even if we eat food,
this nourishment
has the task of transferring
the sunlight stored there
within its chemical bonds to
the consumer in such a way
that it can be
optimally reorganized.
This organizing
capacity of the consumer
by which he gets used
from eating of food
does not come from the molecules
consumed, but from the light
that he or she literally
sucks out of the food.
Take sugar, for example.
Sugar consists of carbon
dioxide and water.
Carbon dioxide is
expelled by the lungs.
Water is excreted by the organs.
What remains is light.
So essentially, it is
not matter, substances,
or molecules that we
live on but information.
Burning fuel is a pure energy
process that is tied into this,
but doesn't play a major role.
What is essential is
the storage of light
and the supply of
light to the organism,
because the organism
is a light being.
That is why it is
asserted, and it
is theoretically
possible for an organism
to give up physical food
and live on light alone.
This is indeed
theoretically possible.
>> Of course, it's very easy
for people to dismiss the idea.
Because to say, well,
there are an awful lot
of people out there who
are starving to death.
And clearly, if they could
eat light, they would do it.
So there is something which
is not an obvious effect.
You may require 40 years
of meditation experience
before you can get to the
point where you can do this.
Well, if you're
starving to death,
you don't have a chance to
spend 40 years meditating.
It's too late.
>> I still don't understand
why some people apparently live
without food while
others starve.
This question leads
me to California
to the Institute
of Noetic Sciences
to talk to the consciousness
researcher, Dean Radin who
offers me insight into the
world of human consciousness.
>> Consciousness seems to
be an organizing principle,
something that creates order.
So sometimes, you
get to say, well,
what is the difference
between a living
person and a non-living person?
Two minutes before they're dead.
The only difference
is in one case,
there seems to be a
conscious awareness.
And when they're dead, there's
no conscious awareness anymore.
Well, then, maybe
conscious awareness
is something like an
organizing principle.
It's something that
organizes energy.
And if you extract that
organizing principle
from the body, the body
very quickly falls apart.
Dean Radin has
been doing research
for more than 25 years
for the US government
and various research institutes
on phenomena and possibilities
of human consciousness.
He is the man to
ask, to what extent
it is possible for the
body to be nourished
by the power of mind alone?
>> The tradition is worldwide.
There are breatharians.
There are people doing
the practice of bigu.
And these traditions,
I think, are
taking advantage of the fact
that what we really need
to survive is ordered energy.
That's what we actually consume.
The reason why plants and,
indirectly, animals are useful
is because they
are a way of taking
the coherent energy of the
sun and storing it and making
it even more coherent.
And then we eat that.
And so what we're eating is not
so much the physical nutrients
as the energetic.
And this fits in, then,
with this experiment
that we did using chocolate.
What we did was
one group would get
the commercial
chocolate, which is not,
quote, "treated" by intention.
And the other
group blindly would
receive chocolate
that had been placed
in the vicinity of very
long-term Tibetan Buddhist
meditators.
And the meditators were told
to take the intention of anyone
who would consume
this food would
feel an increased sense
of vitality, and energy,
and improved mood.
And at the end, we
did the analysis.
And what we found was
a significant increase
in better mood in the people
eating the treated chocolate
as compared to the
non-treated chocolate.
And if you take it
to its extreme case,
it may be that through
intention alone,
you're able to extract whatever
you need from a surround
to maintain your
physical condition.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We have an old saying
that faith moves mountains.
The phenomenon of being
able to achieve things
with the right attitude
is nothing new.
But that it would
work to this extent,
that really is still an unknown.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Today, all we really know is
what increases life expectancy,
what really has anti-aging
effects is a truly meager diet.
If you give lab animals,
from rats to monkeys or apes,
a diet of fast food, you
decrease the life expectancy
by 30%.
If, however, you feed them
a thoughtfully calibrated
and very minimal diet
appropriate to their species,
you will increase their
life expectancy by 25%.
>> Animal experiments show
that a slight chronic food
deficiency causes
subjects to live longer.
Now, we want to test humans.
Initial studies are
already underway.
But for the average
person, convincing
them to voluntarily reduce their
intake by the amount required,
that would be a
tall order indeed.
[ROCK MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I'm not saying,
people, you eat too much.
You have to cut back.
That you must eat
only healthy foods.
My message is conscious
eating and, above all,
conscious being.
Ultimately, it's not
about eating at all.
Other forms of energy do exist.
If people will only open
themselves up to this,
unbelievable things
become possible,
things science cannot
yet explain, for example,
that humans don't need to eat.
>> There are plenty
of references.
And in physics, they have
gone to the next level.
There, the paradigm shift
has already taken place.
>> Classical physics is the
everyday view of the world with
things moving around,
exerting forces on each other.
And that doesn't
explain the behavior
of atoms and so on very well.
So eventually, what we call
the quantum theory was devised.
And quantum mechanics
seems to get into problems,
unless you take mind and
consciousness into account.
I suspect that Eastern
philosophy is, broadly
speaking, on the right
grounds, and their mind
is more fundamental.
>> Science is now agreeing
that without consciousness is
a causal agency of the
world, we cannot understand.
We cannot make sense
of quantum physics.
We are shocked to find that
what the ancient mystics used
to say, consciousness
is the ground of being,
is the current
view of the world,
not the one that science
has proposed for the last--
and accepted-- for
the last 400 years.
>> Until 20 years ago, most
scientists simply ignored
consciousness.
It wasn't part of science.
But of course, it exists.
So quantum theory gives
us a very different view
from the old 19th
century materialist view.
Consciousness is a
field of possibilities.
And I think the realm
of consciousness
is the realm of possibility.
And our minds are
systems of fields.
I don't think they're confined
to the insides of our heads.
I think our minds extend
out far beyond our heads.
>> What we call the mind has
the power to control and even
protect that which we
call matter or body.
The time is now right for this
to become common knowledge.
There are experiments, including
scientific ones, that clearly
show we can influence
matter with our minds,
for example, the
pair experiments
at Princeton University.
There, they set up a system
with many little balls.
These balls cascade
over a structure
and are distributed
into an array of pockets
with the so-called Gaussian
distribution if, that is,
no external influences
exerted upon them.
And the people-- normal
people off the street,
with no particular abilities--
they were given the
task of influencing
this normal distribution of
pushing the balls either more
to the left or to
right, and it worked.
>> What is exciting here is
that we can go into a physical
science laboratory and generate
effects that relate to matters
of the spirit, of the soul,
of the will and affect balls
coming down a cascading,
and affect bits coming out
of a little
micro-electronic box.
>> All of the results that we
claim effects on are the result
of many tens of thousands
or even millions of repeated
trials.
And we're seeing again and
again and again the shift
in the direction of intention.
It's clearly a real effect.
We have no doubt of that.
>> But what comes out of this--
and I think this
is the excitement--
is that the mind is
much more powerful,
and that a mind is
not only observing.
The mind is creating.
The mind is capable
of producing effects.
And that's mind-blowing.
Excuse me.
>> As soon as we abandon the
idea that the mind is confined
to the inside of the head, if
we accept that the mind depends
on fields which extend
far beyond the head,
then there's no problem in
accepting these phenomena.
They fit into an enlarged
view of the mind.
They're just the
kind of thing we
would expect if the mind
extends beyond the brain.
>> The instant the possibility
arises that mind might be
non-local--
that it's not just in there, but
it spreads out a little bit--
well, how far does it go?
The answer is, it
goes everywhere.
It's connected to
the entire universe.
And we really should begin to
think in terms of a connection
to everything.
>> We live in a
distributed mind.
It's a little bit like looking
out over an ocean, where
there are waves popping up.
Each peak on those
waves that pop up
are just like an individual.
It feels separate.
But at a deeper level,
there's actually
connectivity with
all the rest of it.
>> That is an extremely
important message of the new
science.
New science is telling us
that we are one, literally,
underneath our separateness.
Now, it says that it's
stupid to be violent.
And it is stupid not to love,
because we are connected.
>> We are part of the world.
We're not merely
passive observers.
We create the world, each
of us to a very tiny degree,
but collectively, to
a significant extent.
The world is a construction
of human consciousness.
>> I'm not saying stop
eating and drinking.
That's not the point.
I'm just saying that through
the phenomenon breatharianis,
a lot of people are coming
to a critical reevaluation
of their relationship
to matter in general.
And that includes
eating and drinking.
>> We have to hypothesize
alternative forms
of alternative source of energy.
And that is the real thing
which I'm looking at.
I'm not looking
at this one case.
I'm looking the
force behind that.
And that is really going to
change the future of mankind.
And I'm pretty sure.
Take it from me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]